README.md, before:

This builds an up-to-date [Proxmox Backup Server](https://www.proxmox.com/en/proxmox-backup-server) Vagrant Base Box.

Currently this targets Proxmox Backup Server 3.

# Usage

Create the base box as described in the section corresponding to your provider.

If you want to troubleshoot the packer execution see the `.log` file that is created in the current directory.

After the example vagrant environment is started, you can access the [Proxmox Backup Server Web Interface](https://10.10.10.3:8007/) with the default `root` user and password `vagrant`.

## libvirt

Create the base box:

```bash
make build-libvirt
```

Add the base box as suggested in make output:

```bash
vagrant box add -f proxmox-ve-amd64 proxmox-ve-amd64-libvirt.box
```

Start the example vagrant environment with:

```bash
cd example
vagrant up --no-destroy-on-error --provider=libvirt
```

## Packer build performance options

To improve the build performance you can use the following options.

### Accelerate build time with Apt Caching Proxy

To speed up package downloads, you can specify an apt caching proxy 
(e.g. [apt-cacher-ng](https://www.unix-ag.uni-kl.de/~bloch/acng/))
by defining the environment variables `APT_CACHE_HOST` (default: undefined)
and `APT_CACHE_PORT` (default: 3124).

Example:

```bash
APT_CACHE_HOST=10.10.10.100 make build-libvirt
```

### Decrease disk wear by using temporary memory file-system

To decrease disk wear (and potentially reduce io times),
you can use `/dev/shm` (temporary memory file-system) as `output_directory` for Packer builders.
Your system must have enough available memory to store the created virtual machine.

Example:

```bash
PACKER_OUTPUT_BASE_DIR=/dev/shm make build-libvirt
```

Remember to also define `PACKER_OUTPUT_BASE_DIR` when you run `make clean` afterwards.

## Variables override

Some properties of the virtual machine and the Proxmox Backup Server
installation can be overridden. Take a look at `proxmox-backup-server.pkr.hcl`,
`variable` blocks, to get an idea which values can be verridden. Do not override
`iso_url` and `iso_checksum` as the `boot_command`s might be tied to a specific
Proxmox Backup Server version. Also take care when you decide to override
`country`.

Create the base box:

```bash
make build-libvirt VAR_FILE=example.pkrvars.hcl
```

The following content of `example.pkrvars.hcl`:

* sets the initial disk size to 128 GB
* sets the initial memory to 4 GB
* sets the Packer output base directory to /dev/shm
* sets the country to Germany (timezone is updated by Proxmox VE installer) and changes
  the keyboard layout back to "U.S. English" as this is needed for the subsequent
  `boot_command` statements
* sets the hostname to `pbs-test.example.local`
* uses all default shell provisioners (see [`./provisioners`](./provisioners)) and a
  custom one for german localisation

```hcl
disk_size = 128 * 1024
memory = 4 * 1024
output_base_dir = "/dev/shm"
step_country = "Ger<wait>m<wait>a<wait>n<wait><enter>"
step_hostname = "pbs-test.example.local"
step_keyboard_layout = "<end><up><wait>"
shell_provisioner_scripts = [
  "provisioners/apt_proxy.sh",
  "provisioners/upgrade.sh",
  "provisioners/network.sh",
  "provisioners/localisation-de.sh",
  "provisioners/reboot.sh",
  "provisioners/provision.sh",
]
```

# Packer boot_command

As Proxmox does not have any way to be pre-seeded, this environment has to answer all the
installer questions through the packer `boot_command` interface. This is quite fragile, so
be aware when you change anything. The following table describes the current steps and
corresponding answers.

| step                                                | boot_command                                          |
|----------------------------------------------------:|-------------------------------------------------------|
| select "Install Proxmox Backup Server (Graphical)"  | `<enter>`                                             |
| wait for boot                                       | `<wait3m>`                                            |
| agree license                                       | `<enter><wait>`                                       |
| target disk                                         | `<enter><wait>`                                       |
| type country                                        | `United States<wait><enter><wait><tab><wait>`         |
| timezone                                            | `<tab><wait>`                                         |
| keyboard layout                                     | `<tab><wait>`                                         |
| advance to the next button                          | `<tab><wait>`                                         |
| advance to the next page                            | `<enter><wait5>`                                      |
| password                                            | `vagrant<tab><wait>`                                  |
| confirm password                                    | `vagrant<tab><wait>`                                  |
| email                                               | `pbs@example.com<tab><wait>`                          |
| advance to the next button                          | `<tab><wait>`                                         |
| advance to the next page                            | `<enter><wait5>`                                      |
| hostname                                            | `pbs.example.com<tab><wait>`                          |
| ip address                                          | `<tab><wait>`                                         |
| netmask                                             | `<tab><wait>`                                         |
| gateway                                             | `<tab><wait>`                                         |
| DNS server                                          | `<tab><wait>`                                         |
| advance to the next button                          | `<tab><wait>`                                         |
| advance to the next page                            | `<enter><wait5>`                                      |
| install                                             | `<enter><wait5>`                                      |

**NB** Do not change the keyboard layout. If you do, the email address will fail to be typed.

Commit message:

add support for the proxmox builder

README.md, after:

This builds an up-to-date [Proxmox Backup Server](https://www.proxmox.com/en/proxmox-backup-server) Vagrant Base Box.

Currently this targets Proxmox Backup Server 3.

# Usage

Create the base box as described in the section corresponding to your provider.

If you want to troubleshoot the packer execution see the `.log` file that is created in the current directory.

After the example vagrant environment is started, you can access the [Proxmox Backup Server Web Interface](https://10.10.10.3:8007/) with the default `root` user and password `vagrant`.

## libvirt

Create the base box:

```bash
make build-libvirt
```

Add the base box as suggested in make output:

```bash
vagrant box add -f proxmox-ve-amd64 proxmox-ve-amd64-libvirt.box
```

Start the example vagrant environment with:

```bash
cd example
vagrant up --no-destroy-on-error --provider=libvirt
```

## Proxmox

Set the Proxmox VE details:

```bash
cat >secrets-proxmox.sh <<EOF
export PROXMOX_URL='https://192.168.1.21:8006/api2/json'
export PROXMOX_USERNAME='root@pam'
export PROXMOX_PASSWORD='vagrant'
export PROXMOX_NODE='pve'
EOF
source secrets-proxmox.sh
```

Create the template:

```bash
make build-proxmox
```

**NB** There is no way to use the created template with vagrant (the [vagrant-proxmox plugin](https://github.com/telcat/vagrant-proxmox) is no longer compatible with recent vagrant versions). Instead, use packer or terraform.

## Packer build performance options

To improve the build performance you can use the following options.

### Accelerate build time with Apt Caching Proxy

To speed up package downloads, you can specify an apt caching proxy 
(e.g. [apt-cacher-ng](https://www.unix-ag.uni-kl.de/~bloch/acng/))
by defining the environment variables `APT_CACHE_HOST` (default: undefined)
and `APT_CACHE_PORT` (default: 3124).

Example:

```bash
APT_CACHE_HOST=10.10.10.100 make build-libvirt
```

### Decrease disk wear by using temporary memory file-system

To decrease disk wear (and potentially reduce io times),
you can use `/dev/shm` (temporary memory file-system) as `output_directory` for Packer builders.
Your system must have enough available memory to store the created virtual machine.

Example:

```bash
PACKER_OUTPUT_BASE_DIR=/dev/shm make build-libvirt
```

Remember to also define `PACKER_OUTPUT_BASE_DIR` when you run `make clean` afterwards.

## Variables override

Some properties of the virtual machine and the Proxmox Backup Server
installation can be overridden. Take a look at `proxmox-backup-server.pkr.hcl`,
`variable` blocks, to get an idea which values can be verridden. Do not override
`iso_url` and `iso_checksum` as the `boot_command`s might be tied to a specific
Proxmox Backup Server version. Also take care when you decide to override
`country`.

Create the base box:

```bash
make build-libvirt VAR_FILE=example.pkrvars.hcl
```

The following content of `example.pkrvars.hcl`:

* sets the initial disk size to 128 GB
* sets the initial memory to 4 GB
* sets the Packer output base directory to /dev/shm
* sets the country to Germany (timezone is updated by Proxmox VE installer) and changes
  the keyboard layout back to "U.S. English" as this is needed for the subsequent
  `boot_command` statements
* sets the hostname to `pbs-test.example.local`
* uses all default shell provisioners (see [`./provisioners`](./provisioners)) and a
  custom one for german localisation

```hcl
disk_size = 128 * 1024
memory = 4 * 1024
output_base_dir = "/dev/shm"
step_country = "Ger<wait>m<wait>a<wait>n<wait><enter>"
step_hostname = "pbs-test.example.local"
step_keyboard_layout = "<end><up><wait>"
shell_provisioner_scripts = [
  "provisioners/apt_proxy.sh",
  "provisioners/upgrade.sh",
  "provisioners/network.sh",
  "provisioners/localisation-de.sh",
  "provisioners/reboot.sh",
  "provisioners/provision.sh",
]
```

# Packer boot_command

As Proxmox does not have any way to be pre-seeded, this environment has to answer all the
installer questions through the packer `boot_command` interface. This is quite fragile, so
be aware when you change anything. The following table describes the current steps and
corresponding answers.

| step                                                | boot_command                                          |
|----------------------------------------------------:|-------------------------------------------------------|
| select "Install Proxmox Backup Server (Graphical)"  | `<enter>`                                             |
| wait for boot                                       | `<wait3m>`                                            |
| agree license                                       | `<enter><wait>`                                       |
| target disk                                         | `<enter><wait>`                                       |
| type country                                        | `United States<wait><enter><wait><tab><wait>`         |
| timezone                                            | `<tab><wait>`                                         |
| keyboard layout                                     | `<tab><wait>`                                         |
| advance to the next button                          | `<tab><wait>`                                         |
| advance to the next page                            | `<enter><wait5>`                                      |
| password                                            | `vagrant<tab><wait>`                                  |
| confirm password                                    | `vagrant<tab><wait>`                                  |
| email                                               | `pbs@example.com<tab><wait>`                          |
| advance to the next button                          | `<tab><wait>`                                         |
| advance to the next page                            | `<enter><wait5>`                                      |
| hostname                                            | `pbs.example.com<tab><wait>`                          |
| ip address                                          | `<tab><wait>`                                         |
| netmask                                             | `<tab><wait>`                                         |
| gateway                                             | `<tab><wait>`                                         |
| DNS server                                          | `<tab><wait>`                                         |
| advance to the next button                          | `<tab><wait>`                                         |
| advance to the next page                            | `<enter><wait5>`                                      |
| install                                             | `<enter><wait5>`                                      |

**NB** Do not change the keyboard layout. If you do, the email address will fail to be typed.
